---
layout: post
title: Problem-11
mathjax: true
categories: Problems
problem_id: 1011
---

**(RMO-1999)** Find all solutions in integers $m, n$ of the equation $(m - n)^2 = \cfrac{4mn}{m + n - 1}.$

<hr><br>

We will look at two ways of solving the problem, both being slight variations of the same underlying principle. <br><br>

**Method-1:**<br><br>

Since we are working with integers, let us clear the denominator keeping in mind that $m + n \neq 1$:

$$
(m + n - 1)(m - n)^2 = 4mn
$$

There are two paths to choose from. One is to expand the expression and simplify it as best as we can to get a quadratic equation in $m, n$. The other is to keep $(m + n)$ and $(m - n)$ as separate blocks. The latter is more appealing for two reasons. One is that we can make of use identities like $(m + n)(m - n)$ to potentially simplify things. Second is to merely postpone the task of laboriously expanding the expression. So let us try it out. As long as $m + n \neq 1$:

$$
\begin{align*}
    (m + n - 1)(m - n)^{2} &= 4mn\\
    (m + n)(m - n)^2 - (m - n)^2 &= 4mn\\
    (m + n)(m - n)^2 &= (m - n)^2 + 4mn\\
    (m + n)(m - n)^2 &= (m + n)^2\\
    (m + n)[(m - n)^2 - (m + n)] &= 0
\end{align*}
$$

This suggests two independent sets of solutions:


- $m + n = 0$
- $(m - n)^2 = m + n$, with $m + n \neq 1$


From the first equation we get the set of solutions to be $\{(d, -d),\ d \in \mathbb{Z}\}$. For the second equation, if we let $m - n = d$, then the equation transforms as follows:

$$
\begin{align*}
    d^2 &= (d + n) + n\\
    \implies n &= \cfrac{d(d - 1)}{2}\\
    \implies m &= \cfrac{d(d + 1)}{2}
\end{align*}
$$

We also have $m + n = d^2 \neq 1$. Thus we can parameterize the solution using a single variable, $d$, as $\Bigg\\{ \Bigg( \cfrac{d(d - 1)}{2}, \cfrac{d(d + 1)}{2} \Bigg) ,\ \|d\| \neq 1,\ d \in \mathbb{Z} \Bigg\\}$. As $d = 0$ already appears in the first set of solutions, we can write the complete set of solutions as given below:


>$$
S = \{(d, -d),\ d \in \mathbb{Z}\} \bigcup \Bigg\{ \Bigg( \cfrac{d(d - 1)}{2}, \cfrac{d(d + 1)}{2} \Bigg) ,\ \|d\| \geq 2,\ d \in \mathbb{Z} \Bigg\}
$$


**Method-2:** The appearance of $(m+n)$ and $(m - n)$ suggests the following change of variables: $m + n = u, m - n = v$. Then $u^2 - v^2 = 4mn$. The transformed equation now becomes:

$$
\begin{align*}
    v^2(u - 1) &= u^2 - v^2\\
    \implies u(v^2 - u) &= 0
\end{align*}
$$

This suggests two solutions:


- $u = 0 \implies m + n = 0$
- $v^2 = u \implies (m - n)^2 = m + n$, [$m + n \neq 1$]


From here the solution proceeds in the same way. <br><br>

**Notes:**

- The second method is superior in that it made the simplification of the equation much easier. 
- This is an interesting observation that we made along the way: if the square of the difference, $d$, between two integers is equal to their sum, then the two integers are consecutive triangular numbers, $T_{d - 1}, T_{d}$.
- This solution was obtained from the book AMTI-Junior.
