---
layout: post
title: Problem-18
mathjax: true
categories: Problems
problem_id: 1018
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

To prove that $\sqrt{n}$ is an irrational number for all positive integers $n$ that are not perfect squares, a student writes down the following proof:


1. If possible, let $\sqrt{n}$ be a rational number $\cfrac{p}{q}$, with $p, q \in \mathbb{Z^{+}}$ and $GCD(p, q) = 1$.

2. $\sqrt{n} = \cfrac{p}{q} \ \implies p^2 = nq^2$

3. $n \| p^2\ \implies\ n \| p$

4. Let $p = an \implies a^2n = q^2$

5. $n \| q^2 \implies n \| q$

6. $GCD(p, q) \geq n$, a contradiction!


Is the student's proof correct? If not, where did he go wrong and how would you correct it? 

<!--more-->

<hr><br>

The proof is incorrect and the problem is with step-3. If $n \| p^2$, it is not necessary that $n \| p$. For example,  $12\ \|\ 18^2$, but $12 \not \|\  18$. This would have been true had $n$ been a square-free number, but more of that in another problem.<br><br>

To prove the statement for any non-square number, it would be good to begin with a representation of $n$ as the product of a square-free number and a perfect square. Any non-square $n$ can be uniquely written in the form:

$$
n = fk^2
$$

where $f$ is a square-free number different from $1$ and $k$ is any natural number. Note that for a perfect square, the square-free part is $1$. With this representation, $\sqrt{n} = k\sqrt{f}$. It is now enough to prove that $\sqrt{f}$ is irrational for any square-free number $f$. The product of a non-zero rational number with an irrational number is anyway irrational.


1. If possible, let $f$ be a rational number  $\cfrac{p}{q}$, where $p, q \in \mathbb{Z^{+}}$ , $GCD(p, q) = 1$ and $f$ is a square-free number greater than $1$.
2. $\sqrt{f} = \cfrac{p}{q} \implies p^2 = fq^{2}$
3. As $p^2$ is a perfect square, $f = 1$.
4. But $f > 1$, a contradiction!

