---
layout: node
mathjax: true
problem_id: 136
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
main-topic:
sub-topic: 
source:
prereq: 
---

Let the faces of a cube be numbered $1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6$ in such a way that the three pairs $(1, 6), (2, 5), (3, 4)$ lie on opposite faces of the cube. At each vertex of the cube, the product of the three numbers on the three faces containing the vertex is written. What is the sum of all the eight numbers written at the eight vertices of the cube?<br><br>

**Source: Gauss-Contest, 2019**

<!--more-->
<hr><br>



Assume that you are standing in front of the cube. We will use the following way to name the faces of the cube. The face directly in front of you is $F$, front face. The face opposite to this is $B$, back face. The faces to the left and right of you are called $L$ and $R$ respectively. The faces to the top and bottom are called $U$ and $D$ respectively, which stand for up and down.<br><br>

Now, the face $F$ has four vertices. Let us call them the $F$-vertices as they all have the face $F$ in common. Now, the vertex-product for each of the $F$-vertices can be written down by moving in this cycle of faces $L-U-R-D-L$. The clockwise cycle starts from face $L$ and ends there. As $F$ is common to all vertices, we will take that common. The sum of the vertex-product for all $F$-vertices will be:

$$
F \times (L \times U + U  \times R + R \times D + D \times L)
$$

To calculate the sum for the other four vertices, the $B$-vertices, just rotate the cube around a vertical axis so that the back face $B$ is in front of you. Now, the left and right faces would have swapped positions. So let us calculate the vertex-product by moving in the anti-clockwise cycle $L-U-R-D-L$:

$$
B \times (L \times U + U  \times R + R \times D + D \times L)
$$

Notice the close similarity between these two sums. With that we can add the two and simplify. As the sum in the bracket is the same for both, we can directly write down:

$$
\begin{align*}
\text{Sum} &= (F + B) \times (L \times U + U  \times R + R \times D + D \times L)\\
&= (F + B)[U(L + R) + D(L + R)]\\
&= (F + B)(U + D)(L + R)
\end{align*}
$$

We know that $F + B = U + D = L + R = 7$. So the sum is $7^3 = 343$.

