---
layout: simple_post
title: Problem-96
mathjax: true
categories: Problems
problem_id: 1096
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
status: solved
difficulty: easy
topics: time and work
source: original
similar: 
---

An army of size $N$ has to be maintained for a period of $D$ days. During wartime supplies are less and the most sensible thing would be to share whatever is available equally among all members. But this is peacetime and the army's food habits can generally be divided into two camps: normal-eaters and over-eaters. Each over-eater consumes $g$ times as much food as any normal-eater.  
- If the fraction of normal-eaters in the army is $f$, estimate the fraction of the total stock of food consumed by a normal-eater in a day.
- A regiment with codeword "Heaven" has no over-eaters. In another regiment with codeword "Hell", every normal-eater has a daily supply that is one half of the daily supply available to any soldier in "Heaven". In both armies, the amount of food lasts for $D$ days for $N$ soldiers and the fraction of normal-eaters in "Hell" is $\frac{1}{2}$. How greedy are the over-eaters in "Hell"? In other words, estimate the value of $g$. 


<!--more-->
<hr><br>

### Part - 1

- Let the food available be one unit.
- The fraction of food available on any given day is $\cfrac{1}{D}$.
- Given the day's supply, let the quantity of food available to one normal-eater be $x$.
- Then the total amount consumed by all normal-eaters put together is $f \cdot N \cdot x$. Note that we are still dealing with fractions of the total stock.
- The amount consumed by an over-eater is $g \cdot x$. For $(1 - f) \cdot N$ over-eaters, this quantity is $(1 - f) \cdot N \cdot g \cdot x$.
- The consumption of the whole army is the sum of these two quantities and is equal to $\cfrac{1}{D}$:

$$
\begin{align*}
f \cdot N \cdot x + (1 - f) \cdot N \cdot g \cdot x &= \cfrac{1}{D}\\
f \cdot x + (1 - f) \cdot g \cdot x &= \cfrac{1}{N \cdot D}\\
x \Bigg[f + (1 - f) \cdot g \Bigg] &= \cfrac{1}{N \cdot D}\\
x &= \cfrac{1}{N \cdot D} \cdot \cfrac{1}{f + (1 - f) \cdot g} 
\end{align*}
$$

### Part - 2

- The amount of food available to each soldier in "Heaven" on any given day is $\cfrac{1}{N \cdot D}$.
- The amount of food available to each normal-eater in "Hell" on any given day is $\cfrac{1}{2 \cdot N \cdot D}$.
- Setting $x$ from the previous part equal to this quantity, we get:

$$
\begin{align*}
\cfrac{1}{2 \cdot N \cdot D} &= \cfrac{1}{N \cdot D} \cdot \cfrac{1}{f + (1 - f) \cdot g}\\ \\
f + (1 - f) \cdot g &= 2\\ \\
g &= \cfrac{2 - f}{1 - f}\\ \\ 
\implies g &=  1 + \cfrac{1}{1 - f}
\end{align*}
$$

- Setting $f = \cfrac{1}{2}$, we get $g = 3$. So half soldiers in the regiment "Hell" consume three servings of every dish. Quite greedy!