---
layout: post
title: Problem-93
mathjax: true
categories: Problems
problem_id: 1093
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
status: solved
difficulty: very easy
topics: combinatorics
source: Polish Junior Mathematics Olympiad - 2018
similar:
---

Each integer has been colored in one of three colors. Prove that there exists two different numbers of the same color whose difference is a perfect square.<br><br>

**Source : Polish Junior Mathematics Olympiad - 2018**

<!--more-->
<hr><br>

Thanks to user WolfusA from the artofproblemsolving community for this solution. The link to this solution page can be found <a href="https://artofproblemsolving.com/community/c6h1632792p10256500" target="blank">here</a>.<br><br>

If a given coloring already has two integers of the same color whose difference is a perfect square, there is nothing left for us to prove. So let us assume to the contrary that a given coloring doesn't satisfy this property. Then for every integer $n \in \mathbb{Z}$, consider the numbers $n,\ n + 16,\ n + 25$. Now, we claim that all three have different colors. To see this look at the difference between any two of these numbers: $9, 16, 25$. As they are all perfect squares, no two numbers can have the same color. Let us turn to the number $n + 9$. As $(n + 25) - (n + 9) = 16$ and $(n + 9) - n = 9$ are both perfect squares, the color of $n + 9$ must be different from $n + 25$ and $n$. As only three colors are available, $n + 9$ must have the same color as $n + 16$. From this we can see that any two numbers that have a difference of $(n + 16) - (n + 9) = 7$, must have the same color. We could start with $0$. $(0, 7)$ have the same color, so do $(7, 14)$, and so on until $(42, 49)$. Thus we have shown that $(0, 49)$ have the same color. But this contradicts our assumption that the coloring  does not have the property we wish to prove! And that ends our proof.
