---
layout: post
title: Problem-98
mathjax: true
categories: Problems
problem_id: 1098
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
status: solved
difficulty: easy
topics: time and work
source: original
similar: 
---

A construction laborer has been employed to build a rectangular brick wall. Each brick is of dimension $l, b, h$. The wall is to be $pl$ units long, $qb$ units wide and $rh$ units high.

- Find the number of bricks to be laid.
- The level of a brick is given by the number of bricks stacked directly below it. For example, all bricks that are in contact with the ground are at level zero as there are no bricks below them. The bricks just above them are at level $1$ and so on. If the laborer takes $t_i$ minutes to lay one brick at level $i$, find the total time in which he can complete the job. 
- If the numbers $t_0, \cdots, t_{r - 1}$ are arranged in ascending order, what is the most plausible ordering?
- The employer decides to pay the laborer according to the number of hours he works. If the wages per hour is $w$, find his earnings.
- If there is no deadline on the job, what could an unethical laborer do?
- The employer is a shrewd man and fixes a deadline of $D$ hours with a fixed pay of $w \cdot D$ and a penalty of $p$ per hour for failing the deadline. Every hour beyond this deadline would not only mean work without pay for the laborer, but also a reduced salary. If the laborer continues at his current speed, he completes the job in $kD$ hours, $k > 1$. How many times faster should he work if he has to finish the job in the stipulated time?
- Assume that this laborer is illiterate  and signs the terms of this agreement without reading it. The employer has cunningly avoided mentioning the important clause in the agreement. Consequently, the laborer makes no adjustment to his working pattern. If he eventually completes the job, for how many hours would he have worked without wages? How much would he be paid?
- A more benevolent employer is willing to offer a bonus $m$ per hour if the laborer finishes his job before the stipulated deadline in addition to the fixed pay of $w \cdot D$. A hardworking laborer can work $n$ times faster without unduly affecting his health. If he currently takes $kD$ hours to complete the job working at his normal speed, $k > 1$, under what conditions can he earn this extra money? If his physique satisfies these conditions, find the maximum money he can make.

<!--more-->
<hr><br>

### Part - 1

The volume of the wall is $pl \cdot qb \cdot rh = (p \cdot q \cdot r) \cdot (l \cdot b \cdot h)$. The volume of one brick is $l \cdot b \cdot h$. Therefore the number of bricks is equal to:

$$
\cfrac{(p \cdot q \cdot r) \cdot (l \cdot b \cdot h)}{l \cdot b \cdot h} = p \cdot q \cdot r
$$

### Part - 2

There are $p \cdot q$ bricks at each level, with $r$ levels in all. The time taken to stack these bricks at level $i$ is given by $p \cdot q \cdot t_i$. So the total time taken to complete the wall is:

$$
p \cdot q \cdot (t_0 + \cdots + t_{r - 1})
$$


### Part - 3

Laying bricks at a higher level may require more time. For the bricks need to be lifted to a greater height at each level. The following is a plausible ordering:

$$
t_0 \leq \cdots \leq t_{r - 1}
$$

### Part - 4

The total time in hours needed by the laborer to complete the job is

$$
t = \cfrac{1}{60} \cdot p \cdot q \cdot (t_0 + \cdots + t_{r - 1})
$$

The factor of $60$ is required because we are dealing in terms of hours and $t_i$ is given in minutes. His wages are therefore $w \cdot t$:

$$
\cfrac{1}{60} \cdot p \cdot q \cdot (t_0 + \cdots + t_{r - 1}) \cdot w
$$

For the remainder of this question we shall refer to the time taken to be $t$ as and when required.

### Part - 5

If there is no deadline, an unethical laborer can deliberately reduce his efficiency so that it takes a longer time to complete the job. Longer time implies greater wages.

### Part - 6

The amount of work done by the laborer is going to be the same, only his efficiency is going to change. The work he needs to get done can be quantified by the number of bricks that have been laid. Working at his current efficiency, he completes the work in $k \cdot D$ hours. The work done by him in one hour is therefore $\cfrac{p \cdot q \cdot r}{k \cdot D}$. Let us assume that he works $f$ times faster. Then he will lay $f$ times as many bricks in the same time. So the work done with this increased efficiency is $f \cdot \cfrac{p \cdot q \cdot r}{k \cdot D}$. At this efficiency, he has to complete the job in $D$ hours:

$$
\begin{align*}
f \cdot \cfrac{p \cdot q \cdot r}{k \cdot D} \cdot D = p \cdot q \cdot r
\end{align*}
$$

So we get $f = k$, i.e. he has to work $k$ times faster.

### Part - 7

He would have worked for $k \cdot D - D = (k - 1) \cdot D$ hours without pay. As he has exceeded the deadline, he would incur a penalty of $p \cdot (k - 1) \cdot D$. So his final pay would be:

$$
w \cdot D - p \cdot (k - 1) \cdot D = \Bigg[ w - p \cdot (k - 1) \Bigg] \cdot D
$$ 

### Part - 8

If the laborer works $n$ times faster, the amount of work done by him in one hour would be:

$$
n \cdot \cfrac{p \cdot q \cdot r}{k \cdot D}
$$

The total time in which he can complete the job working at this speed is:

$$
\cfrac{p \cdot q \cdot r}{n \cdot \cfrac{p \cdot q \cdot r}{k \cdot D}} = \cfrac{k \cdot D}{n}
$$

The additional wages he will receive would be:

$$
m \cdot \Bigg( D - \cfrac{k \cdot D}{n} \Bigg) = m \cdot D \cdot \Bigg( 1 - \cfrac{k}{n} \Bigg)
$$

These additional wages make sense only when $n > k$. So the laborer must have a physique that is capable of putting in at least $k$ times the current effort. For such a laborer who satisfies this condition, the maximum he can earn is:

$$
w \cdot D + m \cdot D \cdot \Bigg( 1 - \cfrac{k}{n} \Bigg) = D \cdot \Bigg[  w + m \cdot \Bigg( 1 - \cfrac{k}{n} \Bigg) \Bigg]
$$


