---
layout: simple_post
title: Problem-97
mathjax: true
categories: Problems
problem_id: 1097
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
status: solved
difficulty: easy
topics: time and work
source: original
similar: 
---

#### Food Consumption in Armies - a study

An army of size $N$ has to be maintained for a period of $D$ days.  The army's food habits can generally be divided into two camps: normal-eaters and over-eaters. Over-eaters consume $g$ times as much food as normal eaters. The fraction of over-eaters in the army is $f$.

- Estimate the fraction of food consumed by each type of eater in a day.

#### Scenario - 1

- After $d$ days, $n$ soldiers join the army as reinforcements. The fraction of over-eaters in this new contingent is also $f$. If the food supply has to last for the remaining days, how should the food consumption reduce assuming that there is no change in the food habits of the army?
- In the above question, if the over-eaters in the army refuse to decrease their food consumption, how badly will the normal-eaters be affected if the food supply has to last for the remainder of the days?
- Finally waking up to the injustice meted out to them, if the normal-eaters also join the protest, for how many days will the food last?

#### Scenario - 2

- In a different scenario, the existing soldiers in the army team up and demand $p$ times the food consumed by the new entrants. In an act of solidarity, the over-eaters in the new as well as old camp agree to eat just as much food as the normal-eaters in their respective camps. How many more days will the supply last?

#### Scenario - 3

- To add to the misery, rains destroy $w$ fraction of the remaining provisions. If all soldiers agree to reduce their food consumption by a factor of $k$, how long will the food last? Note that the over-eaters decide to follow the eating habits of the normal-eaters given the drastic turn of events.

<!--more-->
<hr><br>

