---
layout: node
mathjax: true
problem_id: 134
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
main-topic:
sub-topic: 
source:
prereq: 
---

Harry Potter has come to purchase a Firebolt for his daughter Lily Luna Potter at Broom Shop in Diagon Alley. It costs $625$ Galleons now. Twenty years ago, during Harry's stay at Hogwarts, its cost was $125$ Galleons. The Nimbus-$2000$, being less popular than the Firebolt, has appreciated at half the rate as the Firebolt over the same period. If the cost of a Nimbus-$2000$ is $219$ Galleons now, what would it have cost when Harry was at Hogwarts? Assume that the annual rate of appreciation stays constant year on year. Also assume the following: $5^{1/20} \approx 1.08$ and $\Big(\frac{26}{25} \Big)^{20} \approx 2.19$.

<!--more-->
<hr><br>

It is convenient and more rewarding to work with variables. So we shall introduce variables right through this problem and make appropriate substitutions in the end. Let the cost of the Firebolt during Harry's stay at Hogwarts be $f_1$ and its current cost $f_2$. Likewise, let the cost of a Nimbus-$2000$ be $n_1$ and $n_2$ during the two periods. Let the number of years separating the two periods be $t$. If the rate of appreciation in the price of a Firebolt is $r$, then we can see the following:

$$
\begin{align*}
f_2 = f_1 \cdot \Bigg(1 + r\Bigg)^t\\ \\
n_2 = n_1 \cdot \Bigg(1 + \cfrac{r}{2}\Bigg)^t\\ \\
\end{align*}
$$

From the first equation we can get the value of $r$:

$$
\begin{align*}
f_2 &= f_1 \cdot \Bigg(1 + r\Bigg)^t\\ \\
\cfrac{f_2}{f_1} &= \Bigg(1 + r\Bigg)^t\\ \\
r &= \Bigg( \cfrac{f_2}{f_1} \Bigg)^{\frac{1}{t}} - 1
\end{align*}
$$

As $\cfrac{f_2}{f_1} = \cfrac{625}{125} = 5$. As $5^{1/20} \approx 1.08$, we can see that

$$
r = 5^{1/20} - 1 = 0.08
$$

Using this rate in the second equation and the second approximation we are given $\Big(\frac{26}{25}\Big)^{20} \approx 2.19$, we get:

$$
\begin{align*}
n_2 &= n_1 \cdot \Bigg(1 + \cfrac{r}{2}\Bigg)^t\\ \\
n_1 &= \cfrac{n_2}{\Bigg(1 + \cfrac{r}{2}\Bigg)^t}\\ \\
&= \cfrac{219}{\Bigg( 1 +  \cfrac{0.08}{2} \Bigg)^{20}}\\ \\
&= \cfrac{219}{\Bigg( \cfrac{26}{25} \Bigg)^{20}}\\ \\
&= \cfrac{219}{2.19}\\ \\
&= 100
\end{align*}
$$

A Nimbus-$2000$ would have cost $100$ Galleons during Harry's time at Hogwarts.