---
layout: simple_post
title: Problem-104
mathjax: true
categories: Problems
problem_id: 1104
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
status: solved
difficulty: very easy
topics: number theory
source: original
similar: 
---

Let $(a_1, \cdots, a_n)$ be a permutation of the first $n$ natural numbers $1, \cdots, n$. Consider the product:

$$
(a_1 - 1) \cdot (a_2 - 2) \cdots (a_n - n)
$$

$(1)\ \ $ When $n$ is odd, prove that this product is always even.<br><br>
$(2)\ \ $ When $n$ is even, find the number of permutations for which the product is odd.<br><br>

<!--more-->
<hr><br>

### Part - 1

Let us assume to the contrary that there exists a permutation $(a_1, \cdots, a_n)$ for which this product is odd. For the sake convenience, let $n = 2k + 1,\ \ k \geq 0$. This means that there are $k$ even numbers and $k + 1$ odd numbers. Since the entire product is odd, each of the $n$ terms must be odd. So $(a_1 - 1)$ must be odd, which implies $a_1$ must be even. As $(a_2 - 2)$ is odd $a_2$ has to be odd. This pattern continues. In general we note that for the term $(a_m - m)$ to be odd, $a_m$ and $m$ cannot both be even or odd. In other words, every odd number in the permutation is paired with an even number. But there are $k + 1$ odd numbers and only $k$ even numbers. So such a pairing is impossible and contradicts our hypothesis that the product can be odd!

### Part - 2

As we noted in the previous part, for the product to be odd, each odd number in the permutation must be paired with an even number; likewise each even number in the permutation must be paired with an odd number. Unlike the previous part, here we have an equal number of odd and even numbers, $\cfrac{n}{2}$ each. So such a pairing is possible. There are $ \Bigg( \cfrac{n}{2} \Bigg)!$ ways of permuting even numbers. Each of these permutations will correspond to one pairing with the odd numbers. Similarly, there are $ \Bigg( \cfrac{n}{2} \Bigg)!$ ways of permuting odd numbers and each permutation is associated with one way of pairing it with even numbers. As these two operations are independent of each other, we have a total of $ \Bigg[ \Bigg( \cfrac{n}{2} \Bigg)! \Bigg]^2$ permutations for which the product will be odd.