---
layout: node
mathjax: true
problem_id: 21
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
main-topic: algebra
sub-topic: polynomials, quadratic equations
source: original
date: 26-04-2020
prereq: 
---

<b>Problem</b>: Using purely algebraic arguments, give an approximate sketch of the graph of a quadratic polynomial of the form $f(x) = ax^2 + bx + c$.

<!--more-->

<hr>


<b>Solution</b>:<br>

- To begin with, let us see what happens to the function for very large values of $\|x\|$. When $\|x\| \gg 1$, the quadratic term will overpower the linear term. So the function will assume very large positive values (if $a > 0$) or very large negative values (if $a < 0$) on either side of the line $x = 0$, sufficiently far away from it. This is some kind of a global understanding of what happens to the function. The next step is a local argument.
- One of the basic requirements for sketching a function locally is to know the regions in the domain where it is either increasing or decreasing. Towards this end, if $x_2 > x_1$, then:

$$
\begin{align*}
f(x_2) - f(x_1) = (x_2 - x_1)\left[ a(x_1 + x_2) + b \right]
\end{align*}
$$


- To determine parts of the domain where the function is increasing, we need the RHS to be positive. The sign of the RHS depends on the sign of $a(x_1 + x_2) + b$. This will be positive when:

$$
a(x_1 + x_2) + b > 0 \implies a(x_1 + x_2) > -b
$$

- If $a > 0$, then we can divide both sides by $a$ without changing the sign of the inequality. If not, we have to switch it. Immediately, we see that two cases have to be considered depending on the sign of $a$. For now, let us restrict our attention to $a > 0$. Then we have:

$$
x_1 + x_2 > \cfrac{-b}{a}
$$

- Now, to understand the local behavior of the function, the values $x_1$ and $x_2$ need to be close to each other. In other words, there is no point evaluating $f(x_2) - f(x_1)$ when $\cfrac{x_2}{x_1} \gg 1$. We can think about this like moving from a point $f(x_1)$ on the curve to a very close point $f(x_2)$. For this, we would need to have $x_1 \approx x_2$. This particular point has a tinge of calculus to it, but that cannot be avoided. So, let $x_2 = x_1 + \Delta$, where $\Delta$ is a very small positive number. Then, we have:

$$
x_1 + x_1 + \Delta > \cfrac{-b}{a} \implies x_1 > \cfrac{-b}{2a} + \cfrac{\Delta}{2}
$$

- It seems that as long as we are to the right of the line $x = \cfrac{-b}{2a}$, the function is increasing; to the left of the line $x = \cfrac{-b}{2a}$ it appears to be decreasing. The graph at this point looks like a $V$ shape, with the vertex at $\cfrac{-b}{2a}$. Of course, it is not an exact $V$ as the function is not linear.
- A $V$ shape function means that its minimum value occurs at the vertex. This can be verified. Refer <a href="/problems/22.html" target="_blank">prereq-1</a> for further details. Also, a $V$ shaped function would mean that a vertical line passing through the vertex would be an axis of symmetry. This can also be verified. Please refer <a href="/problems/23.html" target="_blank">prereq-2</a>.


<hr>

<details>
  <summary> Info </summary>
<div markdown="1">
	Source: {{page.source}}
	Main-topic: {{page.main-topic}}
	Sub-topics: {{page.sub-topic}}
	Pre-requisites: {{page.prereq}}
</div>
</details>