---
layout: node
mathjax: true
problem_id: 24
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
main-topic: algebra
sub-topic: polynomials, division
source: original
date: 27-04-2020
prereq: 
---

<b>Problem</b>: If $f(x)$ and $g(x)$ are two polynomials, then prove that there exists unique polynomials $q(x)$ and $r(x)$ such that $f(x) = g(x) \cdot q(x) + r(x)$ along with $\text{deg}(r) < \text{deg}(g)$.

<!--more-->

<hr>

<b>Solution</b>:<br><br>

There are two parts to this question: existence and uniqueness.<br><br>


<b>Existence</b>

- If $\text{deg}(g) > \text{deg}(f)$, then we can set $q(x) = 0$ and $r(x) = f(x)$. If we try any other polynomial for $q$, then the $\text{deg}(r)$ will be forced to be equal to $\text{deg}(g)$.
- We can now freely work with $\text{deg}(g) \leq \text{deg}(f)$. So let us assume that the polynomials $f, g$ and $q$ have the following forms:

$$
\begin{align*}
f(x) &= f_n x^n + f_{n - 1}x^{n - 1} + \cdots + f_1 x + f_0\\ \\
g(x) &= g_m x^m + g_{m - 1}x^{m - 1} + \cdots + g_1 x + g_0\\ \\
q(x) &= q_{n - m} x^{n - m} + g_{n - m - 1} x^{n - m - 1} + \cdots + q_1 x + q_0
\end{align*}
$$

- As $\text{deg}(g) \leq \text{deg}(f)$, we have $m \leq n$. Also, we have $f_n g_m q_{n - m} \neq 0$. This means that the leading coefficient of none of the polynomials is zero. That follows from the definition of a polynomial of a given degree. Now, what is $q(x)$? It is some polynomial that we have to define precisely. Note that $f$ and $g$ are already known to us. What follows is an algorithm to determine the coefficients of $q$.
- Our aim is to move from the product $g(x) \cdot q(x)$ on the RHS to the LHS. The choice of coefficients for $q$ should be such that, when $q$ is multiplied by $g$, the coefficients of $f$ and the product are the same. If they match exactly for every power of $x$, then there is no remainder. If this matching process falls short at some power of $x$, whatever is left out becomes the remainder polynomial.
- Consider the product $g(x) \cdot q(x)$. We will keep listing down the terms of this product from the highest to lowest degree:

| Power | LHS | RHS |
|:---:|:---:|:---:|
| $x^n$ | $f_n$ | $g_m q_{n-m}$ |
| $x^{n-1}$ | $f_{n-1}$ | $g_{m} q_{n - m - 1} + g_{m - 1} q_{n - m}$ |
| $x^{n - 2}$ | $f_{n - 2}$ | $g_{m} q_{n - m - 2} + g_{m - 1} q_{n - m - 1} + g_{m - 2} q_{n - m}$ |
| $\vdots$ | $\vdots$ | $\vdots$ |
| $x^{n - (n - m)} = x^m$ | $f_{n - (n - m)} = f_m$ | $g_m q_{0} + g_{m - 1} q_{1} + \cdots + g_{m - k} q_{k}$ |

- The last line in the table needs more attention. 
	- If $n - m \geq m \implies n \geq 2m$, then we can set $k = m$. So the last line will read:  $g_m q_{0} + g_{m - 1} q_{1} + \cdots + g_{0} q_{m}$.
	- If $n - m < m \implies n < 2m$, then we have to set $k = n - m \implies k = m$. So the last line will read:  $g_m q_{0} + g_{m - 1} q_{1} + \cdots + g_{2m - n} q_{n - m}$.

- The coefficients can be computed by equating the LHS and RHS:

$$
\begin{align*}
q_{n - m} &= \cfrac{f_n}{g_m}\\ \\
q_{n - m - 1} &= \cfrac{f_{n - 1} - g_{m - 1}q_{n - m}}{g_m}\\ \\
q_{n - m - 2} &= \cfrac{f_{n - 2} - g_{m - 1}q_{n - m - 1} - g_{m - 2}q_{n - m}}{g_m}\\ \\ 
\vdots\ \ \ \ \ \ \ &=\ \ \ \ \ \ \  \vdots\\ \\
q_0 &= \cfrac{ f_m - \left( g_{m - 1}q_1 + g_{m - 2}q_2 + \cdots + g_{m - k}q_k \right)  }{g_m}
\end{align*}
$$

- Thus we have precisely determined the polynomial $q(x)$. We have chosen its coefficients in such a way that, if we consider only terms where the power of $x$ is greater than or equal to $m$, then the product $g(x) q(x)$ is exactly the same as $f(x)$. This means if we subtract this product from $f(x)$, we are left with a polynomial whose degree is less than $m$. This becomes the remainder. Therefore, 

$$
r(x) = f(x) - g(x) q(x)
$$


<b>Uniqueness</b><br>

- If possible, let there be two distinct pairs of polynomials $(q_1, r_1)$ and $(q_2, r_2)$ with $q_1 \neq q_2$ and $r_1 \neq r_2$ such that:

$$
\begin{align*}
f(x) = g(x) q_1(x) + r_1(x)\\
f(x) = g(x) q_2(x) + r_2(x)
\end{align*}
$$

- Note that the degree of both $r_1$ and $r_2$ are less than the degree of $g$ by the algorithm that we demonstrated above. Let us now subtract the two equations:

$$
\begin{align*}
g(x) \left[ q_1(x) - q_2(x) \right ] = r_2(x) - r_1(x)
\end{align*}
$$

- The degree of the product of two non-zero polynomials is equal the sum of the degrees of the individual polynomials. So the LHS has degree of at least $\text{deg}(g)$. The RHS meanwhile has a degree at most $\text{deg}(g) - 1$. This is a contradiction! Therefore, our assumption that there are two distinct pairs of $(q, r)$ is erroneous.

> <center><b>Notes</b></center>
- If $f(x)$ and $g(x)$ are two polynomials, then there exist unique polynomials $q(x)$ and $r(x)$ such that <br><br> <center>$f(x) = g(x) q(x) + r(x)$</center> <br> where $\text{deg}(r) < \text{deg}(g)$.
- Also we have: <center>$\text{deg}(f) = \text{deg}(g) + \text{deg}(q)$</center>


<hr>

<details>
  <summary> Info </summary>
<div markdown="1">
	Source: {{page.source}}
	Main-topic: {{page.main-topic}}
	Sub-topics: {{page.sub-topic}}
	Pre-requisites: {{page.prereq}}
</div>
</details>