---
layout: node
mathjax: true
problem_id: 30
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
main-topic: number theory
sub-topic: euclid's division algorithm
source: from 29
date: 01-05-2020
prereq: 29
---

Describe an algorithm to determine the greatest common divisor of two positive integers $a$ and $b$.
<!--more-->

<hr>

- Euclid's division lemma asserts that for every pair of integers $(a, b)$, with $b \neq 0$, there exists a unique pair of integers $(q, r)$, with $0 \leq r < \|b\|$ such that $a = bq + r$. 
- If $d$ is a common divisor of $(a, b)$, then $d\ \|\ a$ and $d\ \|\ b$. This means that $d\ \|\ (a - bq) \implies d\ \|\ r$. Therefore, $d$ is also a common divisor of $(b, r)$. Conversely, if $d$ is a common divisor of $(b, r)$, then $d\ \|\ b$ and $d\ \|\ r$. This means that $d\ \|\ (bq + r) \implies d\ \|\ a$. Therefore, $d$ is a common divisor of $(a, b)$. From these two observations we can conclude that:

$$
gcd(a, b) = gcd(b, r)
$$

- An alternate way of stating this is, if $\text{dividend} = \text{divisor} \times \text{quotient} + \text{remainder}$, then:

$$
gcd(\text{dividend}, \text{divisor}) = gcd(\text{divisor}, \text{remainder})
$$

- This suggests an iterative procedure by which we can arrive at the gcd of any pair of integers. All that we have to do is repeatedly apply Euclid's division lemma to the divisor and remainder in every division. We shall be following certain notations for the quotients and remainders here. Let us call the quotient-remainder in the $n^{th}$ division to be  $(q_n, r_n)$. We will index from $n = 0$. Now, consider the following sequence of operations:

$$
\begin{alignat*}{0}
&(0):\ \ \ \ \ \ &a &= &b q_0 + r_0\\
&(1):\ \ \ \ \ \ &b &= &r_0 q_1 + r_1\\
&(2):\ \ \ \ \ \ &r_0 &= &r_1 q_2 + r_2\\
&(3):\ \ \ \ \ \ &r_1 &= &r_2 q_3 + r_3\\
&\ \ \vdots\ \ \ \ \ \ &\vdots &= &\ \ \ \ \ \ \ \vdots\\
&(n):\ \ \ \ \ \ &r_{n-2} &= &r_{n-1} q_n + r_n
\end{alignat*}
$$


- From this sequence, we can read off the following equalities:

$$
\begin{align*}
gcd(a, b) &= gcd(b, r_0)\\
gcd(b, r_0) &= gcd(r_0, r_1)\\
gcd(r_0, r_1) &= gcd(r_1, r_2)\\
&\vdots\\
gcd(r_{n-3}, r_{n-2}) &= gcd(r_{n-2}, r_{n-1})
\end{align*}
$$

- The final implication is that $gcd(a, b) = gcd(r_{n-2}, r_{n-1})$. Now, if $r_n = 0$, then $r_{n-1}$ exactly divides $r_{n-2}$. That would mean $gcd(r_{n-2}, r_{n-1}) = r_{n-1}$ and therefore $gcd(a, b) = r_{n-1}$. So, this iterative process must be continued until the remainder becomes zero. At that stage, the divisor is the gcd of the original pair of numbers. Is all of this true? We will have to prove it.
- First, observe that the sequence of remainders keeps decreasing steadily. This is a fallout of Euclid's division lemma:

$$
b > r_0 > r_1 > r_2 > \cdots > r_{n - 2} > r_{n - 1} > r_n \geq 0
$$

- We know that a decreasing sequence of non-negative integers has to terminate after a finite number of steps. In this case, the remainder decreases by at least unity in each step, so there could be at most $b$ iterations. Therefore, at some stage $r_n$ has to become $0$.

- There is one minor portion that we left out. Euclid's division lemma states that "there exists" $(q, r)$ for every $(a, b)$, but it doesn't show us how to compute it. But this is an algorithm and mere claims of existence will not suffice. We are expected to give a precise method to compute $q$ and $r$. So, in general, if we have a pair of numbers $(a, b)$, with $b \neq 0$, then $(q, r)$ can be computed as follows:

$$
\begin{align*}
q &\leftarrow \left \lfloor \cfrac{a}{b} \right \rfloor\\ \\
r &\leftarrow a - bq
\end{align*}
$$

- Here $\left \lfloor x \right \rfloor$ is the greatest integer less than or equal to $x$ and the order of computing $q$ and $r$ matters - first $q$, then $r$. For every division, this computation must be done. That completes our algorithm to find the gcd of two positive numbers.

<hr>

<details>
  <summary> Info </summary>
<div markdown="1">
	Source: {{page.source}}
	Main-topic: {{page.main-topic}}
	Sub-topics: {{page.sub-topic}}
	Pre-requisites: {{page.prereq}}
</div>
</details>