---
layout: node
mathjax: true
problem_id: 32
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
main-topic: algebra
sub-topic: quadratic equations
source: original
date: 02-05-2020
prereq: 
---

Solve for $x \in \mathbb{R}$:

$$
\sqrt{\mathstrut 2 + x} = x
$$

<!--more-->

<hr>

### The usual solution

- First let us solve the problem as it is conventionally done. Then, we will look at certain subtle aspects of the solution that demand greater attention.
- Squaring both sides, we get:

$$
2 + x = x^2
$$

- Rearranging, we get a quadratic equation in $x$:

$$
x^2 - x - 2 = 0
$$

- The solutions to this equation can be obtained by simply factoring the LHS:

$$
(x - 2)(x + 1) = 0 \implies x = 2, -1
$$

- At this stage, we typically go back to the original equation, observe that $x$ has to be non-negative as it is equal to a square root and therefore eliminate $x = -1$ as an "extraneous solution". And the final answer is $x = 2$, which is of course the right answer. But why do we get extraneous solutions? Is it always the case that negative solutions are extraneous? 

### Understanding extraneous solutions

- Why did we get extraneous solutions while solving this problem? Let us list down each step in the solution and look for steps that might introduce difficulties:

$$
\begin{align*}
&(0)\ \ \ \ \ \ \sqrt{\strut 2 + x} = x\\ \\
&(1)\ \ \ \ \ \ 2 + x = x^2\\ \\
&(2)\ \ \ \ \ \ x^2 - x - 2 = 0\\ \\
&(3)\ \ \ \ \ \ (x - 2)(x + 1) = 0 \\ \\
&(4)\ \ \ \ \ \ x = 2, -1
\end{align*}
$$

- Of these five steps, we can see that steps $(1)$ to $(4)$ are harmless. They just involve solving a quadratic equation. So the transition from step $(0)$ to step $(1)$ holds the key. The operation we have done in this step is "squaring both sides". But this seems to be a harmless thing to do, if $L = R$, isn't $L^2 = R^2$?
- When can we say that two equations are equivalent? To answer this question, let us assume that we are in a simple setting where there is an expression involving a single variable $x$ on the LHS, say $L(x)$; and there is another expression involving the same variable on the RHS that we christen $R(x)$. Our equation can then be written as:

$$
(1):\ \ \ \ \ \ L(x) = R(x)
$$

- Normally, while solving equations we add some terms to <em>both sides</em> or multiply <em>both sides</em> by some non-zero term. What we are really trying to do is maintain the balance that exists between LHS and RHS. If we put a weight on the RHS, we have to put the same weight on the LHS, otherwise the equation is no longer the same, it becomes unbalanced. But this analogy will not suffice. To get a more formal picture, consider two numbers $a$ and $b$, with $a \neq 0$, then we say that the equation $L(x) = R(x)$ is equivalent to the following equation:

$$
(2):\ \ \ \ \ \ a L(x) + b = a R(x) + b
$$

- What do we mean by the claim that "the two equations" are equivalent? One meaning could be that we can "move" from equation $(1)$ to $(2)$ and from $(2)$ to $(1)$ without disturbing the "solution-space" of the equation. There are a couple of terms that need clarification. We "move" from $(1)$ to $(2)$ by multiplying both sides by a non-zero $a$ followed by adding $b$ to both sides. We "move" from $(2)$ to $(1)$ by performing the reverse or inverse process, which is subtracting $b$ from both sides followed by division by $a$. In either direction, we see that the solution-space remains undisturbed. That is $x = \lambda$ is a solution of $(1)$ if and only if $x = \lambda$ is a solution of $(2)$.

- Now, let us see what happens when we have this new equation:

$$
(3):\ \ \ \ \ \ \left( L(x) \right)^2 = \left( R(x)\right)^2
$$

- In moving from equation $(1)$ to $(3)$, have we disturbed the solution-space in any way? Yes, we might have! 
- If $\lambda$ is a solution of $(1)$, then $L(\lambda) = R(\lambda)$. This implies $\left( L(\lambda) \right)^2 = \left( R(\lambda) \right)^2$. So $\lambda$ solves $(3)$ as well. No problems there.
- Now for the other direction. Let us say $\mu$ is a solution of $(3)$. This implies $\left( L(\mu) \right)^2 = \left( R(\mu) \right)^2$. If $L(\mu) = R(\mu)$ then $\mu$ solves $(1)$. But if $L(\mu) = -R(\mu)$, which is very much possible, then $\mu$ doesn't solve $(1)$. This means the two equations - $(1)$ and $(3)$ - aren't equivalent. Solving one doesn't imply solving the other. So we are looking at two different equations!
- The learning from this is that, when we square an equation, we are left with a new equation that is <em>not equivalent</em> to the one that we squared. Naturally, the solution to the new equation may introduce extraneous solutions.

### Transforming equations

- At a deeper level, what we have done in moving from $(1)$ to $(3)$ is applied a function to both sides. Getting back to the original equation $L(x) = R(x)$, let $f$ be some arbitrary real valued function of one variable, then:

$$
(4):\ \ \ \ \ \ f\left( L(x) \right) = f\left( R(x)\right)
$$

- In the case of the problem we are solving $f(y) = y^2$. $f$ could be any function, say $f(y) = y^n$ or $f(y) = \sin y$. Now we can see more clearly that $L(x) = R(x)$ and $f(L(x)) = f(R(x))$ are entirely different equations. In fact moving from $(1)$ to $(4)$ itself poses some serious difficulties. For us to be able to make this movement, $L(x)$ and $R(x)$ must be in the domain of $f$. To see how this works, consider the function:

$$
f: \mathbb{R}^{+} \cup \{0\} \rightarrow \mathbb{R}^{+} \cup \{0\}\\ \ \ f(x) = \sqrt{x}
$$

- Let us say that we are working with the following equation and its transformation under $f$:

$$
x = a\ \ \ \ \text{ and }\ \ \ \ \sqrt{x} = \sqrt{a}
$$

- The transformed equation has a solution only when $a \geq 0$ while the original equation has a solution for $a \in \mathbb{R}$. This is because, there is a shift in the domain when we apply the function $f$. It shrinks from $\mathbb{R}$ to $\mathbb{R}^{+} \cup \\{0\\}$. Of course, in the particular example that we have taken, taking the square root seems a silly thing to do. But that is just to illustrate the problem we would encounter when we attempt to transform equations with the use of functions.

- Another example of this domain-shift would be:

$$
x = a\ \ \ \ \text{ and }\ \ \ \sin^{-1} x = \sin^{-1} a
$$

- The solution space of the first equation is the singleton set $\\{a\\}$ for all $a \in \mathbb{R}$. Whereas, the solution space of the second equation is $\\{a\\}$, provided $-1 \leq a \leq 1$. If $a = 100$, then the second equation has no solution. So, when transforming one equation to the other it is possible for the solution-space of the original equation to be a superset of the solution-space of the transformed equation.

- Returning to the general case, let $f$ once again be any arbitrary function. We have shown how important it is to keep track of the domain-shift when we transform an equation with a function. Let us see what happens when we move from the transformed function back to the original. If $\lambda$ solves the transformed equation, we have:

$$
f(L(\lambda)) = f(R(\lambda))
$$

- Does this mean that $L(\lambda) = R(\lambda)$? No! For this to hold, we would need $f$ to be injective or one-one. This is because, if $f$ is one-one, then $f(a) = f(b) \implies a = b$. This is another way to see why we obtain extraneous solution when $f(y) = y^2$ is used for the transformation. The square-function is <em>not</em> one-one. We are now in a position to summarize all that we have learned so far:

> <center><b>Summary</b></center>
- An equation $L(x) = R(x)$ is transformed into another equation $f(L(x)) = f(R(x))$ by the function $f: A \rightarrow B$. Let the solution-space of the first equation be $S_1$ and that of the transformed equation be $S_2$. Then, the two equations are equivalent if and only if $S_1 = S_2$. From this it follows that $L(S_1) = R(S_1) = L(S_2) = R(S_2) \subset A$.
- If $S_1 \neq S_2$, then the two equations are not equivalent, which means that the solving one doesn't imply solving the other.
- In several cases, however, the domain of $f$ is $\mathbb{R}$. In this case, $L(S_1) = R(S_1) \subset \mathbb{R}$. This would mean that $f(L(S_1)) = f(R(S_1))$. So, we could say that $S_1 \subset S_2$. In addition, if $f$ is injective or one-one, then $S_2 = S_1$.
- We could then claim that for functions whose domain is $\mathbb{R}$, the equation $L(x) = R(x)$ is equivalent to $f(L(x)) = f(R(x))$ if and only if $f$ is one-one. For such functions, no extraneous solutions are possible for the original equation. It is only when $f$ is <em>not</em> one-one that there is a possibility of extraneous solutions, and such functions are not rare, the square-function being a typical example.




<hr>

<details>
  <summary> Info </summary>
<div markdown="1">
	Source: {{page.source}}
	Main-topic: {{page.main-topic}}
	Sub-topics: {{page.sub-topic}}
	Pre-requisites: {{page.prereq}}
</div>
</details>