---
layout: node
mathjax: true
problem_id: 33
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
main-topic: number theory
sub-topic: decimal representation
source: original
date: 02-05-2020
prereq: 31
---

If $n$ is a positive integer co-prime to $10$, prove that the decimal representation of $\cfrac{1}{n}$ is non-terminating yet repeating.

<!--more-->

<hr>

- Consider the following power of $10$, starting from $10^0$ all the way till $10^{n-1}$. There are $n$ powers in all:

$$
10^0, 10^1, \cdots, 10^{n-2}, 10^{n-1}
$$

- If each of these $n$ numbers were to be divided by $n$, we can get at most $n$ distinct remainders. But we know that $gcd(n, 10) = 1$, so none of the remainders can be zero. This means only $n-1$ distinct remainders are possible. But there are $n$ numbers. Therefore, by the Pigeon Hole Principle, at least two distinct powers of $10$ must leave the same remainder. In other words, there exist two positive integers $\lambda, \mu$, with $0 < \mu < \lambda < n$, such that $10^{\lambda}$ and $10^{\mu}$ leave the same remainder when divided by $n$. This can be expressed as:

$$
n\ \Big|\  \left( 10^{\lambda} - 10^{\mu} \right)
$$

- We can draw some more inferences from this. As $gcd(n, 10) = 1$, we have:

$$
\begin{align*}
&n\ \Big|\  \left( 10^{\lambda} - 10^{\mu} \right)\\ \\
&\implies n\ \Big|\  10^{\mu} \left( 10^{\lambda - \mu} - 1 \right)\\ \\
&\implies n\ \Big|\ \left( 10^{\lambda - \mu} - 1 \right)\\ \\
&\implies 10^{\lambda - \mu} \equiv 1\ (\text{mod } n) 
\end{align*}
$$

- As $0 < \lambda - \mu < n$, we can phrase this in the following way. There exists an integer $m$, with $0 < m < n$ such that:

$$
10^m \equiv 1\ (\text{mod } n) 
$$

- Now, let $q$ be the quotient when $10^m - 1$ is divided by $n$:

$$
q = \cfrac{10^m - 1}{n}
$$

- Dividing by $10^m$ on both sides and rearranging we get:

$$
\cfrac{1}{n} = 10^{-m} \times q + 10^{-m} \times \cfrac{1}{n}
$$

- Let us look at the two terms on the RHS. As $q$ has at most $m$ digits, $10^{-m}q$ is of the form $0.abcde\cdots$. In the second term, $\frac{1}{n}$ is less than $1$. So, its decimal representation will be of the form $0.a^{\prime}b^{\prime}c^{\prime}d^{\prime}e^{\prime}\cdots$. Which implies $10^{-m} \frac{1}{n}$ will have $m$ leading zeros after the decimal point. What this means is that the second part of the expression on the RHS doesn't affect the first $m$ decimal places of $\frac{1}{n}$. The first $m$ points after the decimal place in $\frac{1}{n}$ is fixed by the digits in $q$.

- From now on, a lot of the proof is similar to <a href="/problems/31.html" target="_blank">prereq-1</a>. We will use a recursive argument, substituting the $\frac{1}{n}$ in the RHS with the RHS:

$$
\begin{align*}
\cfrac{1}{n} &= 10^{-m} \times q + 10^{-m} \times \cfrac{1}{n}\\ \\
&= 10^{-m} \times q + 10^{-m} \times \left[ 10^{-m} \times q + 10^{-m} \times \cfrac{1}{n} \right]\\ \\
&= 10^{-m} \times q + 10^{-2m} \times q + 10^{-2m} \times \cfrac{1}{n}
\end{align*}
$$

- If we let this process continue, for every positive integer $k$, we have:

$$
\cfrac{1}{n} = q \left( 10^{-m} + 10^{-2m} + \cdots + 10^{-km} \right) + 10^{-km} \times \cfrac{1}{n}
$$

- From this we can conclude that if $q = a_1 a_2 \cdots a_m$, then:

$$
\cfrac{1}{n} = 0.\overline{a_1 a_2 \cdots a_m}
$$

- If $q$ doesn't have exactly $m$ digits, then the first few $a_i$s will be zeros. Does this show that the period of repetition is $m$? No! It is not necessary. All that we can conclude from this is that the period of repetition can be at most $m$. To see this, set $n = 9$.

$$
\begin{align*}
10  &\equiv 1\ (\text{mod } 9)\\
100 &\equiv 1\ (\text{mod } 9)\\ 
\ \ \ \vdots\\
10^8 &\equiv 1\ (\text{mod } 9)\\ 
\end{align*}
$$

- There are several values of $m$ to choose from here, where $m = 1$ is the smallest. So the period is $1$. But the proof will work perfectly for any other value of $m$. Only thing is that there would be several smaller cycles within the larger period.

<hr>

<details>
  <summary> Info </summary>
<div markdown="1">
	Source: {{page.source}}
	Main-topic: {{page.main-topic}}
	Sub-topics: {{page.sub-topic}}
	Pre-requisites: {{page.prereq}}
</div>
</details>