---
layout: node
mathjax: true
problem_id: 35
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
main-topic: statistics
sub-topic: mode
source: original
date: 05-05-2020
prereq: 
---

A histogram is formed from some numerical data. The bin-size is constant and is equal to $h$. The modal-class has a frequency of $f_1$ while the pre-modal and post-modal classes have frequencies $f_0$ and $f_2$ respectively. The lower limit of the modal-class is given to be $l$. The estimate of the mode is given by the following equation:

$$
M = l + \cfrac{f_1 - f_0}{2f_1 - f_0 - f_2} \cdot h
$$

How would you derive this formula? What assumptions would be involved?

<!--more-->

<hr>

- Let us call the difference between the frequency of any class in the distribution and the frequency of the modal-class as the "relative frequency". So, the relative frequency of the pre-modal class will be $f_1 - f_0$, while that of the post-modal class would be $f_1 - f_2$. What does the relative frequency measure? It tells us how close a class is to being a mode. If we could list the most frequent classes in descending order, at the top of the list would be the mode. The next in the list would be the class which is closest to the modal-class in terms of its frequency. In other words, the relative frequency of this class would be the smallest of the lot. There is clearly an inverse dependency; smaller the relative frequency, greater is the chance of the class being a mode.
- We know that the mode has to lie somewhere between the two endpoints of the modal class. Now, a naive approach would be to put it bang in the middle. This mode would have a value of:

$$
l + \cfrac{h}{2}
$$

- But we could do slightly better. This is where the relative frequencies of the pre-modal and post-modal classes come in. Notice that, if the pre-modal class has a frequency very close to that of the modal class, then the mode is likely to lie closer to the pre-modal class, which translates to the left half of the modal-class. On the other hand, if the frequency of the post-modal class is very close to the frequency of the modal-class, the mode is likely to lie on the right half of the modal-class. We could express this in terms of the relative frequencies.

$$
\cfrac{(f_1 - f_0)}{(f_1 - f_0) + (f_1 - f_2)}\ \ :\ \ \  \begin{cases} { \leq \cfrac{1}{2},\ \ f_1 - f_0 \leq f_1 - f_2 \\ > \cfrac{1}{2}, \ \ f_1 - f_0 > f_1 - f_2} \end{cases}
$$

- All that remains is to scale this quantity by $h$ and add it to the lower endpoint of the modal-class to get the mode:

$$
M = l + \cfrac{(f_1 - f_0)}{(f_1 - f_0) + (f_1 - f_2)} \cdot h
$$

- Notice that the formula above is the same as the one given in question. But there are some subtle differences. What has been added to the formula is "understanding". We still need to commit something to memory, but it is not the exact formula, but the concept behind it. So, even if we forget the formula, we can derive it from using the concepts. 

<hr>

<details>
  <summary> Info </summary>
<div markdown="1">
	Source: {{page.source}}
	Main-topic: {{page.main-topic}}
	Sub-topics: {{page.sub-topic}}
	Pre-requisites: {{page.prereq}}
</div>
</details>