---
layout: node
mathjax: true
problem_id: 36
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
main-topic: statistics
sub-topic: median
source: original
date: 05-05-2020
prereq: 
---

A histogram is formed from some numerical data consisting of $n$ observations. The bin-size is constant and is equal to $h$. The median-class has a frequency of $f$ while the cumulative frequency until the pre-median class is $F$. The lower limit of the median-class is given to be $l$. The estimate of the median is given by the following equation:

$$
M = l + \cfrac{\frac{n}{2} - F}{f} \cdot h
$$

How would you derive this formula? What assumptions would be involved?

<!--more-->

<hr>

- One possible solution is to suggest that the median is the middle of the median-class:

$$
l + \cfrac{h}{2}
$$

- This wouldn't be a bad estimate. But we can make a better one with the information given to us. As in the estimation of the mode (refer <a href="/problems/35.html"	target="_blank">prereq-1</a>), we can make use of the pre-median class. If the middle observation, $\frac{n}{2}$, is close to the pre-median class, then so is the median.
- First, we divide the median-class into smaller intervals each of size $\frac{h}{f}$. This is a linearity assumption. That is, we assume that the $f$ observations are distributed more or less linearly along the length of the class-interval. With this assumption, we see how far away the $\frac{n}{2}^{th}$ observations is from the lower-limit of the median class. To do this, we note that there are $F$ observations before the median-class, and the median is the $\left( \frac{n}{2} - F \right)^{th}$ observations in the median class. Using the linearity property, the distance of the median from the lower-limit of the median-class would be:

$$
\left( \cfrac{n}{2} - F \right) \cdot \cfrac{h}{f}
$$

- Finally, the median can be obtained by adding to this the lower-limit of the median-class:

$$
M = l + \cfrac{\frac{n}{2} - F}{f} \cdot h
$$


<hr>

<details>
  <summary> Info </summary>
<div markdown="1">
	Source: {{page.source}}
	Main-topic: {{page.main-topic}}
	Sub-topics: {{page.sub-topic}}
	Pre-requisites: {{page.prereq}}
</div>
</details>