---
layout: simple_post
title: Situation-2
categories: Situations
situation_index: 1002
mathjax: true
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

$(5, 12, 13)$ and $(9, 40, 41)$

<!--more-->

<hr>

## Trigger-1

As $(5, 12, 13)$ is a Pythagorean triplet, let us see if $(9, 40, 41)$ is also one.

$$
9^2 + 40^2 = 81 + 1600 = 1681 = 41^2
$$

It indeed is!

## Trigger-2

The difference between the hypotenuse and one of the legs is unity for both triplets: $41 - 40 = 13 - 12 = 1$. Until seeing the second triplet, the only one that I had known satisfying this property was $(5, 12, 13)$. Of course there is $(3, 4, 5)$. But that somehow doesn't seem as surprising as $(5, 12, 13)$ or $(9, 40, 41)$, probably because we are so used to seeing it everywhere. Usually we can generate more triplets by multiplying the simpler ones by a constant factor. For example, from $(5, 12, 13)$ we can generate an infinite number of triplets of the form $(5k, 12k, 13k)$. But in our problem that would increase the difference between the hypotenuse and one of the legs. Moreover the resulting triplets would not be interesting. This led me to ask the question: are there other integer triplets similar in structure to these two? If so, how many are there? <br><br>

To answer this I considered the three numbers to be $(a,\ b,\ b + 1)$. Using the Pythagoras theorem:

$$
\begin{align*}
a^2 + b^2 &= (b + 1)^2\\
a^2 &= 2b + 1\\
b &= \cfrac{a^2 - 1}{2}
\end{align*}
$$

We can then choose the triplet, $\Bigg(a, \cfrac{a^2 - 1}{2}, \cfrac{a^2 + 1}{2}\Bigg)$. But we also have another condition that the triplet should consist of integers, which forces $a$ to be odd. Using this additional information, let $a = 2k - 1$, for any natural number $k$. Then the triplet takes this form:

$$
(2k - 1,\ 2k^2 - 2k,\ 2k^2 - 2k + 1)
$$

We again seem to have a problem when $k = 1$. Here the triplet becomes $(1, 0, 1)$. So we need to enforce the additional constraint that:

$$
\begin{align*}
2k^2 - 2k &> 0\\
\implies k(k - 1) &> 0\\
\implies k &> 1
\end{align*}
$$

As $k$ is a natural number, we have $k \geq 2$. Summing up, the set of integer Pythagorean triplets where the length of the hypotenuse is one more than one of its legs is given by:

> $$
  \Big\{\  (2k - 1,\  2k^2 - 2k,\  2k^2 - 2k + 1)\ \  |\ k \geq 2 \text{ and } k \in \mathbb{N}\  \Big\}
  $$

Clearly, this set is infinite. And there we have our answer to the question.

## Trigger-3

If we probe the triplet further, there seems to be a nice pattern:

$$
\Bigg(\ (k - 1) + k,\ \ 2 \times (k - 1) \times k,\ \ 2 \times (k - 1) \times k + 1\ \Bigg) 
$$

This can be expressed in words as follows:

> Take any two consecutive integers, both greater than 1, and compute three quantities: their sum, two times their product and one more than two times their product. These three quantities form the sides of a right triangle.

## Trigger-4

The product of consecutive numbers makes me go to triangular numbers. If $T_k$ is the $k^{th}$ triangular number, then we have the following identity for all $k \geq 2$:

> $$
  (T_k - T_{k - 2})^2 + (4 T_{k - 1})^2 = (4 T_{k - 1} + 1)^2,\ \ \ k \geq 2
 $$

## Trigger-5

This set also has another interesting property. If we take the first element of each triplet, that gives us a number whose square can be expressed as the difference of the squares of two consecutive natural numbers. So if we collect the first element of each triplet in the set, that will give us a set of natural numbers whose squares can be expressed as the difference of the squares of two consecutive natural numbers. Now, this results in a natural question. Does this set contain every natural number whose square can be expressed as the difference of two consecutive squares? Yes, it does, as we started with $a^2 = (b + 1)^2 - b^2$, which is just a rearrangement of the original equation. Along with the observation that the first element is odd, we have:

> $S_1$: set of all integer Pythagorean triplets for which the hypotenuse exceeds one of the legs by unity. <br><br>
$S_2$: set of all natural numbers whose squares can be expressed as the difference of the squares of two consecutive natural numbers.<br><br>
$S_3$: the set of odd natural numbers<br><br>
There exist **bijective mappings** between any two of these three sets. Or the **cardinality** of all three sets is the same. So we can say that there are as many integer Pythagorean triplets with the said property as there are odd numbers.