---
layout: simple_post
title: $8$ - January
mathjax: true
categories: Problems
problem_id: 1089
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
status: solved
difficulty: very easy
topics: time and work
source: original
similar: 
---

$m$ machines can together finish a job in $t$ hours.  Each machine has been fitted with an emergency mode, which, when activated, increases its efficiency by a factor of $k$. Unless explicitly stated, all machines are in the normal mode.

- Find the fraction of the job done by one machine in one second.
- Find the time taken by one machine to do the entire job.
- If $m_b$ machines break down after $t_b$ hours, find the additional time needed to finish the job with the remaining machines.

The next three parts concern the following scenario: $m_b$ machines break down after $t_b$ hours and are repaired by maintenance folk $t_r$ hours later.

- Find the total time in which the job is completed.
- If the emergency mode is activated in the working machines only during the breakdown phase, find the total time in which the job is completed.
- What should be the factor of efficiency, $k$, during the emergency mode if the entire job has to be completed in a time that is equivalent to the time taken if all machines worked properly (i.e. t hours)?

State all assumptions clearly before proceeding. Explain the physical significance of the answers.


<!--more-->
<hr><br>

## Assumptions

- We are going to assume that each machine works at a constant rate, i.e., the fraction of job completed varies linearly with the time the machine has been working for. For example, if $W(t)$ denotes the fraction of job completed in time $t$, then $W(t) = ft$, where $f$ is a measure of the machine's efficiency of doing the job.
- All machines are identical and have equal capacity. This would mean that the factor $f$ is common for all machines.
- Next, the machines work simultaneously and are independent of each other. There are no dependencies between machines. So if two machines of equal capacity work for the same time, then they will be able to do twice the work of a single machine.   This assumption will break if we are talking about machines in an assembly line of modern day factories; most machines have complex dependencies between them. This seems to be an unrealistic assumption, but introducing dependencies will move this problem away from the realm of elementary mathematics into mathematical models for engineering.

There are six parts to this question.

## Part - 1

We will represent the completion of the job as one unit of work. This will mean that the fraction $\cfrac{1}{2}$ represents half the job done. Now, as all machines work with equal capacity and independently, the work done by a single machine towards the completion of the job is $\cfrac{1}{m}$. And as the job done by a machine varies linearly with time, the amount of job done by a machine in one hour is given by $\cfrac{1}{t} \cdot \Bigg(\cfrac{1}{m}\Bigg) = \cfrac{1}{mt}$.

## Part - 2

As the fraction of job done by a machine in one hour is $\cfrac{1}{mt}$, the number of hours required to complete the job by this one machine is $\cfrac{1}{\frac{1}{mt}} = mt$.

## Part - 3

Until the breakdown all $m$ machines are working. So the amount of work completed in this duration is $\cfrac{1}{mt} \cdot m \cdot t_b = \cfrac{t_b}{t}$. After the breakdown, $m - m_b$ machines continue working. The work that needs to be completed is $1 - \cfrac{t_b}{t}$. Let the number of hours the remaining machines have to work be $x$. Then we have:

$$
\begin{align*}
(m - m_b) \cdot \cfrac{1}{mt} \cdot x &= 1 - \cfrac{t_b}{t}\\
x &= \Bigg(1 - \cfrac{t_b}{t}\Bigg) \cdot \cfrac{mt}{m - m_b}\\
\implies x &= (t - t_b) \cdot \cfrac{1}{1 - \frac{m_b}{m}}
\end{align*}
$$

The additional time the machines have to work is:

$$
\begin{align*}
\Delta t &= \Bigg(t_b + (t - t_b) \cdot \cfrac{1}{1 - \frac{m_b}{m}} \Bigg) - t\\
&= (t - t_b)\Bigg(\cfrac{1}{1 - \frac{m_b}{m}} - 1\Bigg)\\
&= (t - t_b)\cdot \cfrac{m_b}{m - m_b}
\end{align*}
$$

What does the equation convey? Is it just a collection of symbols separated by an equal-to sign, or does it mean anything? Let us play around with the values and see what happens. If there is no breakdown, how do we represent it mathematically? By setting $m_b = 0$. In this case the additional time turns out to be zero. This is expected behavior. The later the machines breakdown, the lesser the additional time needed to complete the job. Which term in the equation encodes this behavior? The later the machines breakdown, the smaller $t - t_b$ becomes. Also, if more machines breakdown, it is going to take a longer time. How do we infer this from the equation? Rewrite the equation as follows:

$$
\Delta t = (t - t_b)\Bigg( \cfrac{1}{1 - \frac{m_b}{m}} - 1 \Bigg)
$$

As $m_b$ increases, $\frac{m_b}{m}$ increases, $1 - \frac{m_b}{m}$ decreases and $\cfrac{1}{1 - \frac{m_b}{m}}$ increases. This means that $\Delta t$ increases as $m_b$ increases.

## Part - 4

Let the total time taken to complete the job be $T$. The duration for which $m_b$ machines are down is $t_r$. So for $T - t_r$ hours, all machines are operational. The fraction of job completed during this time is $\cfrac{1}{mt} \cdot m \cdot (T - t_r) = \cfrac{T - t_r}{t}$. The remaining fraction is done by $m - m_b$ machines during the breakdown phase. Putting these two together, we have:

$$
\begin{align*}
\cfrac{T - t_r}{t} + \cfrac{1}{mt} \cdot (m - m_b) \cdot t_r &= 1\\
T - t_r + \Bigg(1 - \cfrac{m_b}{m}\Bigg) \cdot t_r &= t\\
\implies T &= t + \cfrac{m_b}{m} \cdot t_r
\end{align*}
$$

We can see that that the more time it takes for repair and the more machines get repaired, the longer it will take to complete the job. And these two factors have a multiplicative effect on the additional time.

## Part - 5

As before, the fraction of work done in the non-breakdown phase is $\cfrac{T - t_r}{t}$. During the breakdown phase, the $m - m_b$ machines work with $k$ times the normal efficiency. In terms of work, a machine in emergency mode will do $k$ times as much work as it can do in normal mode in the same duration. How does this translate to the time taken by a machine to complete a job? In emergency mode, a machine will do the same job in $\cfrac{1}{k}^{th}$ time that it takes in the normal mode. The fraction of job completed during the breakdown phase by the $m - m_b$ machines is given by:

$$
(m - m_b) \cdot k \cdot \cfrac{1}{mt} \cdot t_r = k \cdot \Bigg(1 - \cfrac{m_b}{m} \Bigg) \cdot \cfrac{t_r}{t}
$$

Summing the work done and equating it to $1$:

$$
\begin{align*}
\cfrac{T - t_r}{t} + k \cdot \Bigg(1 - \cfrac{m_b}{m} \Bigg) \cdot \cfrac{t_r}{t} &= 1\\
T - t_r + k \cdot \Bigg(1 - \cfrac{m_b}{m} \Bigg) \cdot t_r &= t\\
\implies T &= t + \Bigg[1 - k \cdot \Bigg( 1 - \cfrac{m_b}{m} \Bigg) \Bigg] \cdot t_r
\end{align*}
$$

Here, as the efficiency increases, the additional time decreases.

## Part - 6

If we want $T = t$, then the efficiency should be:

$$
k = \cfrac{1}{1 - \cfrac{m_b}{m}}
$$

As $m_b$ increases, $1 - \frac{m_b}{m}$ decreases, $k$ increases. So the more machines get repaired, the higher is the required efficiency boost during the emergency mode. And if no machines get repaired, $k = 1$ as expected.