---
layout: post
title: 30, September, 2019
categories: Notes
mathjax: true
excerpt: To be decided
---

## [mathematics; algebra; algebra of exponents]

Things that students must know

- basic nomenclature; what is a base and an exponent
- rules of exponent arithmetic
- integer and rational exponents
- conversion from exponents to radicals and vice-versa
- simplification of expressions involving exponents
- solving equations involving variables in the exponents
- comparison of two exponents

### Introduction

Exponentiation is an operation like addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. These five operations form the core of elementary algebra. The reason we introduce this operation is to make repeated multiplication easier. It is the same reason we introduced multiplication in the place of repeated addition. If multiplication is introduced as a shorthand for repeated addition, exponentiation is introduced as a shorthand for repeated multiplication. It is important to note that these are only motivating definitions; both operations quickly outgrow them. For example $\pi^2 = \pi \times \pi$. Adding $\pi$ to itself $\pi$ times is a meaningless statement if we continue count in the space of natural number system. Operations that we have seen till now are binary, meaning they require two operands to act on. The same is true of exponentiation. The two operands are called base and exponent and is written as $\text{base}^{\text{exponent}}$. Unlike the other four operations $+, -, \times, \div$, the operand in the case of exponentiation doesn't have an explicit symbol. Exponentiation is neither commutative nor associative.<br><br>

### Laws of indicies

Next we proceed to study some rules for manipulating exponents. There is a natural progression in the exposition of these rules or laws. They arise quite naturally from the way we introduce exponents. We begin with exponents that are natural numbers. $a^{m + n} = a^m \times a^n$ can be easily demonstrated by placing $m + n$ symbols ($a$) and then grouping them into buckets of size $m$ and $n$. Since this grouping is commutative, the law also becomes commutative at the level of exponents. From this we move on to $a^{m - n} = \frac{a^m}{a^n}$. This is used to define what it means to raise a base to power zero. Post this we can move on to $a^{mn} = (a^m)^n$. Rational indices are best introduced with the help of equations. For example, which number when multiplied to itself three times gives 8? This is the same as the solution to the equation $x^3 = 8$. We call the answer to this as $8^{\frac{1}{3}} = 2$. <br><br>

While this is easy as long as we have perfect cubes, students may struggle against the notion of numbers like $7^{\frac{1}{3}}$ or $2^{\frac{1}{4}}$. It is not clear why we should have a number which when multiplied to itself three times gives 7. Does such a number exist? Its existence itself must come as a surprise. If it doesn't elicit that reaction, there is something wrong with the way we teach number systems to kids. The Greek mathematicians of antiquity were startled at the idea of $\sqrt{2}$. The existence of irrational numbers be a source of wonderment to at least some students.<br><br>

In the case of $\sqrt{2}$, its existence can be geometrically shown. What about $\sqrt[3]{7}$? If it does exist, how does one find it? But before engaging with this barrage of questions, does the student need to be taken through all this? I think he should. So far he has dealt with numbers that he can visualize well. Natural numbers, integers, rational numbers can be very easily visualized. But $7^{\frac{1}{3}}$ may hit him hard. He should have something analogous to $\sqrt{2}$ for which we can always bring up an image of a right triangle with unit legs. For a rigorous argument of the existence of the cube root, he would have to wait until college, but a simple computational argument can be provided. This is also an opportunity to talk about the limit of a sequence. As $1^3 = 1$ and $2^3 = 8$, we will examine the cube of numbers between 1 and 2:

$$
1.5^3 = 3.375\\
1.9^3 = 6.859\\
1.95^3 = 7.414875\\
1.92^3 = 7.077888
$$

We have very quickly come close to 7. If we continue this for some time we get $1.9129^3 = 6.99965768369$. Quite close. It should then be pointed that this process continues indefinitely. In a lighter vein one can quip that $8.000000001$ is taken to be $8$ by engineers most of the time, while it remains $8.000000001$ for mathematicians most of the time.<br><br>

### Integer and rational powers

The jump from integer to rational powers is significant. We introduced $a^{\frac{1}{n}}$ as the solution to this equation:

$$
x^n = a
$$

In general, we could define $a^{\frac{p}{q}}$ as $a^{\frac{1}{q}}$ raised to power $p$ or the solution to the equation:

$$
x^{q} = a^{p}
$$

The use of equations to introduce an operation is a good pedagogical tool in number systems. Every new number system can be connected the solution to some class of equations. For example, simple linear equations like $x + 3 = 0$ or $x + 11 = 5$ do not have a solution in natural numbers. If we adopt a no-equation-left-behind policy, the expansion of natural numbers to integers will help such simple linear equations beget solutions. An equation like $2x + 3 = 12$ forces the introduction of rational numbers. The equation $x^2 = 2$ gives us the irrational and $x^2 = -1$ gives us the complex numbers. This is not the only way of introducing number systems, but this is a good unifying perspective.<br><br>

Coming back to rational exponents, a discerning student might ask the following question:

> Do the laws of indices apply to rational powers as well?

Yes, they do. But this is not obvious and hence the questioner must be appreciated for coming up with this question.

$$
\begin{align*}
(a^{\frac{p}{q}} \times a^{\frac{r}{s}})^{rs} &= (a^{\frac{p}{q}})^{qs}(a^{\frac{r}{s}})^{qs}\\
&= [(a^{\frac{p}{q}})^{q}]^{s}[(a^{\frac{r}{s}})^{s}]^{q}\\
&= a^{ps}a^{rq}\\
&= a^{ps + rq}\\
\implies a^{\frac{p}{q}} \times a^{\frac{r}{s}} &= a^{\frac{p}{q} + \frac{r}{s}}
\end{align*}
$$

What is interesting about this result is that the laws of indices for rational exponents can be deduced from the integer case. They aren't arbitrarily generalized for our convenience. But care must be taken to differentiate the part discussing deduction and the part that defines rational exponents. Please refer <a href="https://math.stackexchange.com/questions/91869/proof-of-exponent-rule-an-m-when-n-and-m-belongs-in-the-reals" target="blank">this</a> link for further details. This is where I obtained the proof from and this link discusses the rules of exponentiation in detail, all the way from integers to real numbers. <br><br>

Note: Students must be fluent in converting a radical to an exponent and vice-versa.

### Problems

There are different types of problems that train the student to master the laws of exponents. It is always useful to have a collection of misconceptions that students are likely to make or have made in the past. This can help in designing problems. One of the most common errors students are likely to commit is in swapping the addition and multiplication law. The source of this confusion must be that the student has just memorized the laws without understanding them. This can be remedied by going over the derivation once more. This provides an excellent opportunity to introduce the concept of "minimal working examples". This is a concept that one of my computer science professors used to insist. For each theoretical concept, remembering a simple example that makes use of the idea can be pretty useful for future recall.