---
layout: post
title: 7, October, 2019
categories: Notes
mathjax: true
excerpt: To be decided
---

## [uniformity; education]

### Uniforms and Uniformity

The uniform promotes equality. That much has always been clear. But does it also press for uniformity by suppressing individual identities? All students must be treated equally, but each student also happens to be an individual with diverse talents and abilities. The uniform's purpose is to ensure equality of treatment, but its role ends there. One student may have great aptitude for mathematics, another for vocal music. Forcing the former to sit through a class of advanced vocal training is as pointless as forcing the latter to attend a class of multi-variable calculus. Care must be taken to prevent uniforms morphing into binding chains of uniformity. This line separating equality and uniformity is not so legibly drawn for all to see. Teachers must develop a third eye to sense abilities latent in kids. With the help of teachers, academic institutions must make the discovery of talents in children something systemic. After all, that is the meaning of education: drawing out the abilities latent in a child. Sri Aurobindo defines this as a three-step process:

- Discovery
- Development
- Application

There is some unique ability in each of us. The goal of education is to "find it, develop it and make the best use of it as benefits the individual and mankind".

## [time budget; life skills]

### Time Budget

- a budget is the allocation of finite resources among a population
- here the resource we are talking about is time and the population is defined by the activities an individual would like to engage in
- health and wealth are two resources that greatly influence the way we perceive time and how we spend it; a healthy body and a wealthy background can be great head-start in life
- a budget consists of two closely related actions
	- partition
	- distribution (allocation)
- the success in an endeavor is usually measured by the duration (quantity) for which we are engaged in it; the 10,000 rule popularized by Malcom Gladwell in his book "The Outliers" is one formulation of this idea - the more time we spend doing an activity, the better we become. But this is only one part of the story. There are two other factors which in combination with quantity determine our efficiency or productivity. They are quality and consistency. The 10,000 hour rule does seem to include consistency, but the way it is expressed (10,000) seems to lay emphasis only on the quantity. So the product of quantity, quality and consistency determine the efficiency.
- why is drawing up a time-budget important? how we spend our weeks is how we spend our lives. As an extension, how we spend our days is how we spend our weeks, and how we spend the hours is how we spend our days.
- a large majority of people spend their lives without framing a budget even once during their lifetimes. The default budgetary principle for most of us is to limit the number of activities (population) so that partitioning and distributing the resource (time) doesn't cause much problem.
- a single note is monotonous, we need at least three notes to form a chord, at least fine notes need to come together to form a raga. but too many sounds results in a cacophony, so clearly there is a need for a harmony or a balance. Physicist Chandrasekhar is a good example of this balance; your life should be a song, not a constant note
- time-activity synergy; this principle suggests a temporal coordinate that is approximate and appropriate for a particular activity; a too stringent adherence to this principle will result in increased stress levels
	- walk and exercise in the morning; walk during the evening
	- vocal training at the same time in the evening
- form habit chains
	- listening to music right after breakfast, lunch and dinner
	- read few pages of a book before going to bed
- priority
	- each activity should be assigned some hours followed by a priority
	- if new activities come up, they should be assigned a chunk of time followed by a priority
- budget must be renewed every month, if needed every week, but it should not be tampered with during a day; a day is the atomic unit for preparing a budget and should be left as it is
- first frame the budget in terms of total number of hours, then see how it can be distributed in a week

### Example budget

Total number of hours in a week available for non-physical activities for a given week is approximately 50 hours. Each entry in the budget is of the form (activity, hours, priority) <br><br>

| Activity | Allocation <br> (hours)| Priority |
| :---: | :---: | :---: |
| mathematics | 25 | high|
| vocal music | 5 | high|
| education (assimilation) | 10 | high |
| education (exploration) | 8 | medium |
| entertainment | 2 | low |
| **Total** | **50** | | 



## [technology in education; geometry; mathematics]

### A software for learning geometry

GeoGebra is an excellent software for learning geometry. The question is, how can it be integrated into an interactive online book?