---
layout: post
title: 25, September, 2019
categories: Notes
mathjax: true
excerpt: To be decided
---

## [mathematics;algebra;algebraic expressions]

In yesterday's class, we were doing factorization of algebraic expressions. One of the students asked me why we should study factorization. This is a common question that gets asked at the beginning of every new topic. I think this is a legitimate question even though it can be a great source of frustration for teachers. I believe teachers ought to provide a convincing reply. Whether students are convinced or not is a different question. In fact these questions are pivotal moments in a classroom when the teacher can get some converts to the math-is-interesting camp. Some teachers do provide an answer, and it usually takes the form of a utilitarian argument. Let us examine some of these:

- [This topic is a prerequisite for an advanced topic which you will encounter in higher grades.] This is a weak reply that merely transfers the responsibility of providing an answer to a future teacher in a higher grade.
- [This subject is very important if you intend to take up engineering. Some time can be spent glorifying this profession, how the world is run by engineers, how Sundar Pichai started out as an engineer and is now the head of a giant technological company. Mathematics is at the heart of engineering. There is no shortcut to becoming good at it.] This is a powerful argument and may appeal to some students. What about subjects like history? What do people who have a good understanding of the social sciences do?
- [This is a part of your syllabus; questions from this chapter will appear in your exams. Your responsibility as a student is to study well and score well in your exams. If you don't take an interest in this subject, how will you be among the toppers?] Students who are already at the top or who hate occupying the lower rungs of the academic ladder will be convinced by this argument; coming out at the top is a powerful incentive for them. Others will be indifferent to this argument.


I can think of two arguments:

- Duty or *dharma*: For the moment, let us assume that your parents have refused to come and pick you up from this class. They call you up after class and give their reason for this behavior, "We do this job of picking you up every Tuesday and are bored of the whole thing. So catch a bus or auto and come home". You are irritated by this careless response. Before you can retort, the call has ended. This doesn't help either. Going home all by yourself is a big challenge to you as you have never stepped on a bus or auto without your parents. So you grudgingly walk to a bus stop nearby. After about ten minutes, you realize that the traffic on the road is very lean, something unusual for this hour. Besides, it also strikes you that not a single bus has gone past you. Just then you see an auto coming at a distance. You wave your hand to stop it. As the auto comes to a stop near you, you heave a sigh of relief when you find the passenger seat empty. The first thing you ask the automan is about the sparse traffic and the absence of buses on the road. To this the automan replies that bus drivers are on strike. When you ask why, he replies that bus drivers are bored of driving the same bus morning and evening, seven days a week, in the same route with the same conductor. They wanted to take a break today. Your irritation increases. How could government servants be so irresponsible? Momentarily conquering your irritation, you ask the automan to drop you at Velacherry. The automan chuckles and says that all auto-driver unions have declared a strike after drawing inspiration from their bus-driving counterparts. "Why should bus-drivers have all the fun", he says and then takes off. You feel frustrated at the world's indifference to a young boy's travails How could they do this to me, you think? With fewer and fewer vehicles on the road, you start panicking and try to call your mother. To your great dismay, you get a recorded message: "Airtel has suspended all its telecommunication lines for a day. Please bear with the inconvenience." By now you are in a rage, stomping your foot down in the hope of generating a few tremors that might disturb the lazy city. Your actions don't even seem to raise any dust; apparently the sand particles seem to be on a strike of their own! This is truly infectious. So you begin your long 5 km walk back home. You reach home, drenched in sweat, one hour later only to find out that the power supply has been stopped. By now the script is clear to you and you are no longer surprised. You bang the door fiercely, half-expecting it to break under the might of your anger. Nothing of that sort happens as someone opens it quietly. You sit in the hall waiting for either your mother or father to initiate a conversation, so that you can vent your bottled up emotions on them. This also doesn't happen. "Is anyone going to serve me dinner?", you finally ask. To this comes your mother's response, "I am bored of cooking the same sambar, rasam and dosai everyday. I have decided to take a break from cooking today. You can go out with your father to have dinner." A minute later you wake up from a nightmare.

