---
layout: post
title: 8, October, 2019
categories: Notes
mathjax: true
excerpt: To be decided
---

## [affordance; combinatorial creativity]

I recently purchased four smiley balls. Quite unexpectedly it occurred to me that I could start learning to juggle the balls. Let me take this is an opportunity to introduce two concepts: 

- affordance
- combinatorial nature of creativity. 

According to Wikipedia affordance is what the environment offers the individual. Did the thought of learning to juggle occur to me earlier? No. So what triggered this thought in me? The presence of the smiley balls. Would a single ball have triggered the thought? Not likely. The presence of four balls - what we could define as the environment - suggested the possibility.<br><br>

But this is not the whole story. I recently read a novel titled "A Gentleman in Moscow" by an American author Amor Towles. In this novel, one of the characters is adept at juggling. This piece of information stuck with me and was there in some corner of my mind. On seeing these balls, the visual input somehow locked into the mental impression of juggling. Another input besides these two is that today happens to be Vijayadasmi. According to Hindu tradition, this is an auspicious day for new beginnings. The final input is an answer that I had recently read on Quora that talked about ambidexterity. The author of that answer mentioned her experience of learning to brush with her non-dominant hand - left in her case - and the benefits of doing so. Juggling happens to be one of the activities that demands the use of both hands. This may seem like a post-hoc, retrospective thought that is mistaken to be a trigger. That might be the case. But I would like to think otherwise. These four triggers combined to induce the thought of learning to juggle things. There is nothing novel about the idea of learning to juggle. Plenty of other people get the same idea. But the way in which the diverse parts of my mind came together to generate the final thought is very interesting.<br><br>