---
layout: post
title: 26, September, 2019
categories: Notes
mathjax: true
excerpt: To be decided
---

- Continuing with yesterday's thoughts on a convincing reason to study algebra or mathematics in general. One was the idea of *dharma*. What would happen if the whole world caught hold of a mental infection from you - the idea of going on a strike? You decide that you are bored of studying mathematics everyday and decide that you will stage a strike along with your friends in the classroom by refusing to listen to the teacher. When the school ends on that day, you are waiting for your mother to pick you up. She doesn't seem to be there. You use your teacher's phone to call her. This mental infection has somehow spread to many people. Your mother being the closest to you is the first person to catch the infection. She declares that she will not come to pick you up today. Slowly the infection spreads to other people - bus drivers, auto-drivers, communication service providers, electricity providers. Before night, every conceivable service has been suspended for a day. You have to go to sleep on an empty stomach.

- Now for another idea. For those students who ask why one should study algebra [mathematics in general], one answer is that the modern world is built using mathematics and science. The technology that we see around us is the result of an intellectual revolution. Being a citizen of this modern world and using all the conveniences that technology has to offer, one has to have at least a rudimentary understanding of how it all works. If this knowledge is not imparted to students, then they will continue to take the world for granted. We must remember that the students of coming generations are going to be exposed to technology from a very young age. Unlike previous generations, they don't know the effort that went into the discovery and invention of these technologies. 

- Let us say that a student has a DTH connection at home. DTH is the abbreviation of Direct-To-Home. He is watching a cricket world cup live. Now, pause for a moment and ask this simple question: how does a cricket match happening in a place several hundred kilometers away appear on your television screen in your sitting room? Have humans always had access to this entertainment? Who made this possible? Now the cameras at the stadium record the footage. This footage is beamed to a satellite that is geo-stationary orbit. This satellite beams the signal back to your operator's receiver. Your operator than beams it to another satellite which will beam the signal to you. Now the receiving dishes are called parabolic reflectors. Parabola is a geometric curve that was discovered in ancient Greece 2000 years ago. It has an interesting property that rays parallel to its axis all get reflected to a common point called the focus of the parabola. Now did the Greek discoverer know that a parabola will one day be used to help us see a cricket match? Of course not! He was just doing it because he found it interesting. This was a nice mathematical pattern that he had discovered. He wanted to record it for posterity. 

- The orbit is called geo-stationary. It is located at a distance of $35, 786$ meters above the equator. Why do satellites have to be put at that orbit? When you are receiving the signals from the satellite, your receiver must be oriented in the direction of the satellite. If the satellite keeps changing its position then you would have to keep moving the receiver. In order to avoid this, the satellite should appear fixed from the ground. This means it would have to rotate at the same orbital speed as the Earth rotates about its axis. The orbit at which this happens is the geo-stationary orbit. Now to calculate the height of this geo-stationary orbit, you need to solve a mathematical equation. You need algebra for this. In order to insert a satellite in that orbit, you need to design a rocket that can put it there. The rocket is a heavy object. So you need to calculate the thrust needed to lift it off the ground. For generating a given thrust, you need fuel of a given amount. You need to know at what temperature to burn the fuel to generate the required thrust. Note that all these are precise numbers that you need to arrive at. This is no guess work but precise calculations. You have to perform several such calculations before you can accurately insert the satellite in that orbit. Without mathematics and physics what would you do? You can't watch a single ball being bowled.

- The previous argument is essentially giving an example of the hierarchy of knowledge. If you want to know about something, say how a television works, you need to have some knowledge of physics. If you want to enjoy the Harry Potter franchise, you have to know how to read English. Imagine a UKG kid going on strike, refusing to learn the 26 English alphabets stating that it doesn't find them to be of much use. If the teacher consents and doesn't teach the alphabets, what would happen? The student would grow up not knowing English. He would have to watch the dubbed version in Harry Potter. The translation for snitch in English is *பறக்கும் பந்து* which can be retranslated as flying ball. Look at the loss of information in translation! Not just that, imagine the loss of a combined social experience. Even though you know the storyline, you cannot hold any sensible conversation with an English reader.

- All this is to not claim that English is superior to Tamil. Far from that. Mahakavi Barathi, a great Tamil poet writes: "யாம் அறிந்த மொழிகளிலே தமிழ்மொழி போல் இனிதாவது எங்கும் காணோம்" which roughly translates to: "of all the languages that I know, I have never seen anything as sweet as Tamil anywhere". All that I am claiming is that the process of translation is a lousy business. It is always better to read works of literature in their original.

- You could reduce the entire Harry Potter franchise - books, movies, merchandise - to 26 letters. What a great empire Rowling has managed to build with these 26 letters. The following sentence captures the extent and might of the British Imperial rule at its peak: "the sun never sets on the British empire." This is true of Rowling's work as well. Every continent will have at least a 1000 readers of the Harry Potter books. In fact this is a gross underestimate. The number would be closer to 100,000. If a five year old Rowling had told her mother that she would not learn her alphabets and had her way, imagine what the world would have lost! Could a five year old Rowling have known that learning these 26 alphabets would someday help her create a great empire? No way. This is what we call magic: pulling a magical empire out of alphabets. It is literally and figuratively magical.

- All this goes to show that learning is absolutely pivotal in life. The hierarchy of learning must be respected and students must be shown the immense possibilities that it can unlock. We all have absolutely no clue what part of our learning will help us in the future. Did Sachin know when he made his debut that he would be hailed as the greatest player in the history of the game? Did Rajnikanth or Vijay know that they would each acquire the status of a demigod status in Tamil Nadu? At least actors dream of such fame, there are precedents. Great actors before them have blazed a trail which the newcomers try to follow. But what about some Sri Narendra Modi? Did he know that he would become the prime minister while he was selling tea? Or what about Abdul Kalam? Was anything about his journey in life predictable? Coming from a small town such Rameshwaram and going on to become a celebrated scientist and then the President of the largest democracy is no mean feat. All this started by the man going to school, studying the same subjects as you all do, learning his alphabets, solving simple algebraic equations, nurturing a dream of becoming a scientist one day.