---
layout: post
title: 03, January, 2020
categories: Notes
mathjax: true
excerpt: To be decided
---

- Goodwill towards others must be unconditional, else it becomes business. 
- In this age of commercialism, where man is predominantly a vaishya, all things come with a price tag. Having a price tag to an idea or a product is not bad in itself, but when it becomes the chief driving force, pushing away equally important considerations such as the aesthetic or the ethical, then it is an early sign of degradation in the society. This trend can be seen in several fields of human endeavor, most notably in cricket. The cricketing world has steadily moved towards shorter formats as they are the most commercially valuable. A T20 international has the potential to generate more revenue in one night than a test match. It has even been proposed to reduce the test match to a four-day affair. If such a suggestion is implemented by all test playing nations, it is only a matter of time before the format become extinct. As it is, the test match is a highly endangered format. The day is not far when four days will become three, then two, and eventually merge into the one-day international and thereby become irrelevant. It may not even come as a surprise to many if the test match reaches a sudden death; perhaps a few connoisseurs from the earlier generation may mourn its demise. Another field where this trend can be seen is film music. The quality of both melody and lyrics has become worse. Colloquial speech is termed poetry. The use of English words is also on the rise. Composers are gravitating towards catchy and peppy numbers. Almost every movie is obliged to include one such song. Not even the best composers are excused. Thankfully, some saner minds are working to counter the commercial instinct. The Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) movement is one such example. Free online education is a very promising sign. Khan Academy and Massively Online Open Courses MOOCs are pioneering attempts in this direction. ArXIV, an online journal is making massive strides in academic publishing.
- Prisig writes about using the intellectual knife for classification. One such usage divides the world into two types of learners: bottom-up and top-down.